In current design practice, geotechnical earthquake engineers are often responsible for providing the appropriate design ground motions for structural analysis, studying the effects of earthquakes and elaborating methods to mitigate these effects. A site response analysis is required to investigate the complex interaction between the seismic waves and the local site conditions. Morphology, stratigraphy, water conditions and soil properties have a high infl uence not only on the characteristics of the earthquake (for example in terms of duration, peak acceleration and frequency content) but also on the modelling strategy.

 
For years, the site response analysis has been usually performed using the equivalent-linear visco-elastic approach, provided in well-known one-dimensional codes. However, this approach implies important limitations that can be overcome with the use of numerical models. In particular, PLAXIS allows to:
•	reproduce the non-linear dissipative behaviour of the soil subjected to cyclic loading, taking into account the effect of cyclic degradation
•	model the soil-fl uid interaction, accounting for the possible seismically induced excess pore water pressures by means of fully coupled effective stress analysis and the use of advanced constitutive models
•	create one-, two- or three-dimensional models, based on the specifi c design conditions and/or the local site characteristics
• the appropriate selection of the calculation parameters for the time-step integration
Geometry and lateral boundary conditions
Reality consists of an infi nite continuous soil medium that has to be reduced to a finite representative model. The geometry of the model infl uences the mesh settings and the choice of the most appropriate boundary conditions to represent the far-fi eld medium or to perform a 1D wave propagation analysis. The far-fi eld medium is simulated with the use of free-fi eld elements (Figure 1), where the vertical boundaries absorb the incident waves and are linked to each other through the earthquake signal, while tied degreesof-freedom allow to model a reduced geometry by connecting the nodes at the same elevation on the vertical boundaries. The main advantage of the use of tied degrees-of-freedom is the reduced computational cost for one-dimensional wave propagation analysis with the advantage of using more representative soil constitutive models compared to the equivalent-linear visco-elastic codes.
	Constitutive models
Relevant results have been achieved in PLAXIS by implementing and validating constitutive models for seismic analysis. Every constitutive model allows to model some aspects of the material behaviour but it always involves a certain number of limitations. To choose the most representative material model, it is important to identify the dominating aspects of the material behaviour for the specifi c case-study.
In earthquake engineering problems, the soil is subjected to cyclic shear loading, showing a nonlinear dissipative behaviour. Its stiffness decays with the increasing strain level induced by the loading, and the sequence of loading and unloading paths generates an hysteretic loop with dissipation of energy and consequent damping (Figure 2). Some of the traditional constitutive models, as for example MohrCoulomb, cannot describe the hysteretic damping. Instead, the total amount of damping is introduced through the frequency-dependent Rayleigh formulation in terms of viscous damping, that has to be 
Detailed information on the facilities implemented in PLAXIS for dynamic analysis and the description of the available constitutive models can be found in the PLAXIS Manuals. In addition, some elaborated examples are published in the PLAXIS  Knowledge Base platform to help engineers with the use of PLAXIS for seismic analysis (Laera & Brinkgreve, 2015). The most relevant aspects related to this type of projects are:
•	the defi nition of an appropriate geometry and the corresponding required lateral boundary conditions
•	the selection of the most representative constitutive models for the soil involved and the calibration of the model parameters
•	the application of the input motion and defi nition of the bottom boundary condition
•	the discretization of the model in terms of type and dimension of the element in the fi nite element mesh
 
 
Figure 1: Free-fi eld boundaries in a 2D dynamic analysis
 
6	Plaxis Bulletin  l  Autumn issue 2015  l  www.plaxis.com
consistent with the level of strain induced by the earthquake. In PLAXIS, material models capable of capturing the soil damping through the hysteretic loop are available in the library or as user-defi ned soil model, such as the HSsmall and the Generalised Hardening Soil model. Advanced constitutive models usually require an adequate knowledge of the model parameters and a good calibration strategy. For this reason, some examples have been published in the PLAXIS Knowledge Base (Laera & Brinkgreve, 2015), showing the applicability of the material models mentioned above and the parameter calibration based on well-known geotechnical tests and literature data. The case-study has been validated against the results of the analysis performed with a one-dimensional code, showing comparable results with several advantages in the modelling process and with the important capability of determining the excess pore pressures.
Due to the increasing interest towards liquefaction analysis, a site response analysis has been performed and published in the PLAXIS Knowledge Base (Laera &
Brinkgreve, 2015) using the UBC3D-PLM model, available as a user-defi ned soil model in PLAXIS. This model accounts for the accumulation of strains and pore pressures in sandy soils, that is determinant to capture the onset of liquefaction. The calibration of the parameters and the comparison with the results of a simplifi ed procedure are described, showing that PLAXIS can be used to trigger liquefaction.
Input motion and bottom boundary condition
Among the other input data to the design project, the seismic motion has to be correctly assigned at the base 
of the model (Figure 3). PLAXIS allows to model the 	γ (%) bottom boundary as either a fully refl ective boundary or a compliant base. The former represents the case 
of a very soft soil overlying a rigid bedrock, while the Figure 2: Hysteretic behaviour in the HSsmall model latter can model an absorbent boundary. In both cases, the signal can be applied through a prescribed displacement in terms of time-history accelerations, velocity or displacement. No conversion into a loadhistory signal is required, since PLAXIS automatically transforms the input into stresses applied to the main domain. The input signal required in the two possible alternatives at the base of the model is 
 
 
 
different, since a fully refl ective boundary requires the full input motion (given by the superposition of upward and downward waves) as measured at the bedrock depth, while the compliant base formulation is based only on the upward motion (in the case of both the horizontal and vertical component of the earthquake), which could be roughly considered as half of the motion measured at the outcropping rock.
Mesh and calculation parameters
The accuracy of the calculation depends also on the size and distribution of the elements in the mesh. In PLAXIS the mesh generation is based on a robust triangulation procedure (Figure 4). In the case of a dynamic analysis, the size of the elements needs to be 

chosen based on the characteristics of both the soil and the input signal. The average element size must be less than or equal to one-eight of the wavelength, which depends on the lowest shear wave velocity in the soil and the maximum frequency component of the input wave (i.e. the highest frequency component that contains appreciable energy). These aspects are taken into account also in the calculation process, where the calculation parameters should be consistently specifi ed. 
The dynamic equations of motion are integrated based on time-stepping schemes characterized by calculation features related to the accuracy, numerical damping and stability (the number of steps and substeps, the Newmark damping coeffi cients and the mass matrix, among the others). The automatic procedure implemented in PLAXIS ensures that a wave does not cross more than one element per time step: the critical time step is fi rst estimated according to the element size and the material stiffness, then the time step is adjusted based on the number of data points specifi ed as dynamic multipliers. 
Output facilities
8          Plaxis Bulletin  l  Autumn issue 2015  l  www.plaxis.com
A considerable amount of output information can be inspected in the PLAXIS Output program. At the end of the calculation, the deformed mesh can be viewed and, based on the stored number of steps, it is possible to create an animation.
Besides the quantities that can be displayed in terms of contour plots for any kind of calculation, additional dynamic parameters can be chosen, as for example velocities and accelerations. For soils, in the case of advanced constitutive models like HSsmall, Generalized Hardening Soil and UBC3D-PLM, other parameters, such as the stiffness, the accumulated excess pore pressures and their ratio with respect to the initial effective stresses, that allows to evaluate the onset of liquefaction in the case the UBC3DPLM material model has been used (Figure 5), can be inspected. As for structures, it is possible to evaluate the stresses distribution and the amount of displacements at the end of the dynamic analysis.
In design projects, it is often required to extract time history quantities and response spectra at some desired depths, as for example the foundation level. Via the Curve facility in PLAXIS, it is possible to create several plots for preselected points (nodes or stress points) in the mesh. Charts of time-history displacements, velocities and accelerations at the selected nodes can be generated and also transformed in their corresponding representation in the frequency-domain. Among the other curves, response spectra can be generated for preselected nodes. They represent the locus of the maximum response of a structure, idealized as a single degree 
[-]
of freedom system, for different values of stiffness and damping ratio. The response spectra in terms of accelerations, known as PSA spectra, are useful to determine the predominant period, i.e. the period related to the peak PSA value, and the acceleration associated to the natural period of vibration of the design structure (Figure 6).
Conclusions
In this article, a general overview of PLAXIS capabilities in geotechnical earthquake engineering projects has been presented. The dynamic analysis of a geotechnical system depends on an extensive site characterization, a good knowledge on the advantages and limitations of the numerical codes and an appropriate choice of the several components that defi ne the model.
Several new features have been implemented in PLAXIS in the last years and more documentation are now available to provide a useful framework for dynamic fi nite element analysis. Further studies aiming at investigating and extending the validation of PLAXIS in different dynamic environments are encouraged. 
References
•	Laera, A., Brinkgreve, R.B.J. (2015). Ground response analysis. Plaxis Knowledge Base.
•	Laera, A., Brinkgreve, R.B.J. (2015). Site response analysis and liquefaction evaluation. Plaxis Knowledge Base.
 

Figure 5: Pore pressure ratio for triggering liquefaction	Figure 6: PSA spectrum
        9
